So how does React work?
Lets not forget that React is a JavaScript library
for building user interfaces.
That's what I taught you at the very beginning
of this course and of course it hasn't changed.
We also learned and we saw,
that React is all about components.
We use components to build those user interfaces,
and React embraces this component concept.
It uses components to effectively compose user interfaces
and it uses components
to effectively update user interfaces.
There's one important note.
We also saw this ReactDOM thing
and in the end ReactDOM is your interface to the web.
React itself, React.js does not know the web.
It does know nothing about the browser in the end.
React knows how to work with components
but it doesn't care
whether those components contain HTML elements
or if they contain totally fictional elements,
that does not matter to React.
It's ReactDOM to which that matters in the end
and which ultimately needs to bring real HTML elements
to the screen.
But React is just a library that manages components,
that manages state
and that manages different components states
and that finds out how components might need to change
and which differences you might have from a previous state
of a component compared to the current state.
And React hands all that information regarding what changed
and what should be visible on the screen
no matter what screen that is,
off to the interface it's working with,
for example, it hands it off to ReactDOM
because ReactDOM is then responsible
for working with the real DOM, which is part of the browser.
And therefore ReactDOM is responsible
for bringing something onto the screen,
which the user is then able to see.
React only cares about components.
It cares about props, which is basically data you pass
to components to make components configurable
and to enable parent-child component communication.
React cares about state
which is internal data inside of a component.
And React cares about context
which is component-wide data.
Now of course, React has a couple
of other features built in as well.
But these are the core features.
And whenever props, state or context changes,
components that use these concepts are updated
by React and React checks whether this component
now wants to draw something new onto the screen.
And if that should be the case,
React will let ReactDOM know about that
so that ReactDOM is able to bring that new screen,
that new component, that new output to the screen.
So therefore, if we have a close look at that components
real DOM communication here,
the question of course is, how exactly does this work?
As I mentioned, React is concerned about components
and what React in the end does is,
it uses a concept called the virtual DOM.
It determines how the component tree,
which your app is building in the end,
and every component itself, of course, has a sub tree,
that JSX code returned by that component.
It determines how that component tree currently looks like
and what it should look like,
for example, after a state update.
And that information is then handed off to ReactDOM
which now knows about the differences
and which then knows how it should manipulate the real DOM
to match that virtual DOM,
that virtual snapshot React derived
for your component trees.
And related to that, there's one important thing to note.
Throughout this course I often said
that React would rerun a component function,
that it would reevaluate a component.
And indeed, as I mentioned before,
whenever state props, or a context of a component changes,
that component function is re-executed.
That component is re-evaluated by React.
But it is worth noting
that reevaluating a component is not the same
as re rendering the DOM.
So just because a component function is re-executed by React
does not mean that the respective part
of the actual real DOM
is re-rendered or re-evaluated.
Instead we have to differentiate between our component part,
our React part and the real DOM.
Our components, as I just said,
are re-evaluated whenever props, state or context changes.
So React then executes that component function again.
Now the real DOM on the other hand is only updated
in the places where it needs to be changed
based on that difference React derived
between the previous state of a component and its tree
and the current state after the state prop
or context change.
So the real DOM is not changed all the time.
It's changed rarely and only when needed.
And that's important for performance,
because making a virtual comparison
between the previous state and the current state,
that's fairly cheap and easy to do.
That happens only in memory.
Reaching out to the real DOM, that's rendered in the browser
is pretty expensive from a performance perspective,
because working with the real DOM just turns out
to be a performance intensive task.
Of course not a tiny change in one place,
but if you do that tiny change
in a lot of places all the time,
then your page might become slow
because you're working with the real DOM too much.
And that's my React has this structure
of doing virtual comparisons with that virtual DOM
and then only passing the changes between your last snapshot
and the current snapshot to the real DOM.
That's how React works here.
It does this virtual DOM diffing,
finding out the difference between two snapshots.
And to see a real example,
it could look like this.
Let's say all the given component
our previous evaluation result.
So when the component function ran the last time is this.
And now some state changes
and all of a sudden we wanna show a new paragraph.
So that's our current evaluation result.
In this case, React would determine that the difference
between both snapshots is this paragraph
and it would report does change to ReactDOM
so that ReactDOM can update the real DOM
and insert this paragraph.
ReactDOM would not rerender the entire DOM.
It would not touch this existing h1 or div element.
It would only insert the paragraph
after the h1 element inside of the div.
That's how React works behind the scenes in a nutshell.
Now let's see this in action with some real code
and let's play around with that a bit
so that we get a feeling for this
and so that we can all find out how this all behaves
and possibly changes for props and state changes
for context, and for other components being involved
because it is really crucial that you understand this.